---
title: d66 habit tracker
year: 2020
category: web development
tools: React, Typescropt, Express, MongoDB
bgcolor: '#cfe2ff'
external: https://intense-gorge-10926.herokuapp.com
featureimg: ../assets/images/work/d66-feature.png
order: 1
---

## Disclaimer: this is a Bootcamp project.
{: .intro .title .is-4 .has-text-weight-light .has-line-spacing-tall}
### d66 is a web app that allows users to track their changing habits journey, while providing useful encouragement (or shaming) tips to help them along the way.
{: .intro .title .is-4 .has-text-weight-normal .has-line-spacing-tall}

I built d66 as a final project for a Full Stack development Bootcamp I took in late 2020 as a way to stretch my Back End muscles. I wasn't feeling very challenged by the projects I was working on full time back then, and I felt the need of adding some new tricks into my tech stack.

{% include webp.html
webp = "../assets/images/work/d66-1.webp"
legacy = "../assets/images/work/d66-1.png"
alt = "d66 mobile view"
%}

d66 is built on a **React + Typescript** front end, leveraging the MaterialUI library for speed. I also used the React Date picker library since date input was a crucial part of the app but I didn't have the time to build a custom component for that. I wanted to focus on building the API and taking the time to understand the data structure to make the app work correctly.

The application back end  uses an **Express** server to interact with a **MongoDB** database. By leveraging **Mongoose** I could communicate with the database and perform data modelling in a JavaScript-oriented logic that felt more natural. I came up with a simple structure with `Goals`, `Entries` and `Users` collections, represented in this early sketch:

{% include webp.html
webp = "../assets/images/work/d66-2.webp"
legacy = "../assets/images/work/d66-2.jpg"
alt = "database collections sketch"
%}

 I implemented **node-jsonwebtoken** to store and retrieve a logged-in state. I exposed it in a middleware function called `verifyToken` that is called before entering each route:

 ```js
 //tokenService.js
 const verifyTokenService = (token) => {
  let user

  jwt.verify(token, KEY, (err, decodedToken) => {
    if (err) {
      throw err
    }

    user = decodedToken
  })

  return user
}
 ```

```js
// router
const router = express.Router()
router.use(verifyToken)
```

{% include webp.html
webp = "../assets/images/work/d66-3.webp"
legacy = "../assets/images/work/d66-3.png"
alt = "d66 desktop timeline view"
%}

 I also used the **bcrypt.js** library to salt passwords and store them securely in the database. Here's the implementation as a pre-save hook on the `Users` collection:

 ```js
// Pre Save Hooks
UserSchema.pre('save', async function (next) {
  const user = this
  try {
    if (user.isModified('password') || user.isNew) {
      user.password = await bcrypt.hash(user.password, 12)
    }
    next()
  } catch (err) {
    // ...
  }
})
```

I deployed the whole application using Heroku. You can run the app live [here](https://intense-gorge-10926.herokuapp.com) and see the source code [here](https://github.com/vphilot/d66).
